workshop/influxdb/README.md, before:

---
title: Visualizing Subsurface Float Movement with InfluxDB & FormHandler
prefix: influxdb
...

[TOC]

This tutorial shows how to use [InfluxDB](https://www.influxdata.com/) via [FormHandler](../../formhandler/).
Specifically, we will store a dataset of the GPS coordinates of a [set of
subsurface floats](https://www.aoml.noaa.gov/phod/float_traj/index.php) in InfluxDB,
and visualize them on a map with [Leaflet](https://leafletjs.com).

![Floats](floats.png){.img-fluid}

The dataset contains floats belonging to six experiments. Over the course of the
experiment, the floats travelled along the Americas as shown above. In this
tutorial, we will build an app that visualizes the journey of these floats in
real-time.


## Step 0: Prerequisites

To follow through this tutorial completely, you will need:

1. Gramex community edition ([see installation instructions](/install))
2. An InfluxDB server


We recommend running InfluxDB via Docker, as follows:

```bash
docker pull influxdb:latest
docker run -d -p 8086:8086 \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_MODE=setup \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_USERNAME=user \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_PASSWORD=password \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_ORG=org \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_BUCKET=sofar \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_ADMIN_TOKEN=mytoken123 \
  influxdb:latest
```

## Step 1: Getting the data

Download the dataset [here](floats.json), and put it in an empty folder.

The dataset tracks the movement of SOFAR (SOund Fixing and Ranging)
floats. These are acoustically tracked submersible devices left in the ocean,
and their movements are tracked over a period of time to study oceanic currents.

The data looks like this:


<table class="table table-striped">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>lat</th>
      <th>long</th>
      <th>exp</th>
      <th>day</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>46.521</td>
      <td>-33.005</td>
      <td>CLIMODE</td>
      <td>22</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>49.419</td>
      <td>-39.945</td>
      <td>CLIMODE</td>
      <td>21</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>-58.568</td>
      <td>-91.521</td>
      <td>DIMES2</td>
      <td>31</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>47.157</td>
      <td>-33.939</td>
      <td>CLIMODE</td>
      <td>23</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>59.501</td>
      <td>-47.510</td>
      <td>ACALACE</td>
      <td>19</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Each row represents the latitude and longitude of a float corresponding to an
experiment on a single day. Originally, the time period covered by this dataset
is nearly a decade, but since we need to finish running the visualization in a
much shorter time (say, 30 seconds), we have preprocessed the data such that it
appears as if the entire lifetime of the floats is a little over 30 seconds.

## Step 2: Setting Up FormHandler for InfluxDB

### Step 2.1: The Gramex App Specification
Once the InfluxDB is set up with an initial bucket, create a file named `gramex.yaml` in the same folder with the following contents:

```yaml
app:
  browser: true

schedule:
  push-data:
    function: main.push
    startup: true
    thread: true

url:
  influxdbhandler-data:
    pattern: /$YAMLURL/data
    handler: FormHandler
    kwargs:
      url: influxdb:http://localhost:8086/
      username: user
      token: mytoken123
      org: org
      bucket: sofar
      xsrf_cookies: false
      id: _time
```

### Step 2.2: Push Data to InfluxDB

Next, create a file named `main.py` in the folder, and add the following
content:

```python
import time
import pandas as pd
import requests


def push():
    df = pd.read_json("floats.json")
    while True:
        for day, group in df.groupby("day"):
            requests.post(
                "http://localhost:9988/data?measurement=latlong&tags=exp",
                data=group.to_dict(orient="list"),
            )
            time.sleep(1)
```

### Step 2.3: Add a Map

Next, create a file named `index.html` in the folder, with the following
content:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="https://unpkg.com/leaflet@1.7.1/dist/leaflet.css"
     integrity="sha512-xodZBNTC5n17Xt2atTPuE1HxjVMSvLVW9ocqUKLsCC5CXdbqCmblAshOMAS6/keqq/sMZMZ19scR4PsZChSR7A=="
     crossorigin=""/>
    <style>
      html,
      body {
          height: 100%;
          width: 100%;
      }
      body {
          margin: 0;
      }
      #map {
          width: 100%;
          height: 100%;
      }
    </style>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="map"></div>
  </body>
  <script src="https://d3js.org/d3.v3.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/leaflet@1.7.1/dist/leaflet.js"
   integrity="sha512-XQoYMqMTK8LvdxXYG3nZ448hOEQiglfqkJs1NOQV44cWnUrBc8PkAOcXy20w0vlaXaVUearIOBhiXZ5V3ynxwA=="
   crossorigin=""></script>
  <script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/jquery/3.6.0/jquery.min.js"></script>
  <script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/lodash@4.17.21/lodash.min.js"></script>
  <script>
    var map = L.map('map')
    L.tileLayer('https://{s}.tile.openstreetmap.org/{z}/{x}/{y}.png', {
      attribution: '&copy; <a href="https://openstreetmap.org/copyright">OpenStreetMap contributors</a>'
    }).addTo(map)
    map.fitBounds([
      [67, 147],
      [-63, -189]
    ])

    var data = null
    var polyLines = {}
    var colors = {}
    
    const updatePath = function(name, latlongs, colors) {
      let lat = _.filter(latlongs, {_field: 'lat'})[0]._value
      let lon = _.filter(latlongs, {_field: 'long'})[0]._value
      if (name in polyLines) {
        polyLines[name].addLatLng([lat, lon])
      } else {
        polyLines[name] = L.polyline([[lat, lon]], {color: colors[name]})
        polyLines[name].addTo(map)
      }
    }
    // More JS goes here.
  </script>
</html>
```

Note that we have:

* added some empty variables to accommodate data later, 
* added a function that renders the path of a float on the map, and
* left a placeholder comment to accommodate more Javascript code
as we develop the application through the following steps.

Run Gramex in this folder, and a browser window should open with a map:

![Map](world.png){.img-fluid}

If you visit the [`/data`](http://localhost:9988/data) endpoint in the browser,
you should see some data coming into InfluxDB as follows:


```json
[
  {
    "_start": 1632727879731,
    "_stop": 1635319879731,
    "_time": 1635319879185,
    "_value": 15.0,
    "_field": "day",
    "_measurement": "latlong",
    "exp": "ACALACE"
  }, {
    "_start": 1632727879731,
    "_stop": 1635319879731,
    "_time": 1635319873012,
    "_value": 9.0,
    "_field": "day",
    "_measurement": "latlong",
    "exp": "BOUNCE"
  }, // etc
]
```

As you refresh the page a few more times, you should see more and more records.


### Step 3: Plotting the Data on the Map

In step 2.2, we created a mechanism that pushes data to InfluxDB every second.
Therefore, we also need a corresponding javascript function that _pulls_ the data
from InfluxDB every second, and plots it on the map.

To do this, add the following code at the end of the `<script>` tag in
`index.html` (note that we had left a comment there earlier, to indicate the
position for the following code.

```javascript
    var colors = _.zipObject(
      ['TROATL', 'BOUNCE', 'ACALACE', 'CLIMODE', 'DIMES1', 'DIMES2'],
      ["red", "green", "blue", "yellow", "black", "magenta"]
    )
    var puller = setInterval(function() {
      // Get data accumulated in the last one second
      $.getJSON('data?_offset=-1s').done(function(d) {
          let latest = _.groupBy(_.filter(d, i => ['lat', 'long'].includes(i._field)), 'exp')
          for (const [expname, latlongs] of Object.entries(latest)) {
	    updatePath(expname, latlongs, colors)
          }
        })
    }, 1000)  // Run this every second

```

Refresh the page, and you should see a visualization that looks like this:

![Final](render.gif){.img-fluid}

Commit message:

Mention how to install infludb-client

workshop/influxdb/README.md, after:

---
title: Visualizing Subsurface Float Movement with InfluxDB & FormHandler
prefix: influxdb
...

[TOC]

This tutorial shows how to use [InfluxDB](https://www.influxdata.com/) via [FormHandler](../../formhandler/).
Specifically, we will store a dataset of the GPS coordinates of a [set of
subsurface floats](https://www.aoml.noaa.gov/phod/float_traj/index.php) in InfluxDB,
and visualize them on a map with [Leaflet](https://leafletjs.com).

![Floats](floats.png){.img-fluid}

The dataset contains floats belonging to six experiments. Over the course of the
experiment, the floats travelled along the Americas as shown above. In this
tutorial, we will build an app that visualizes the journey of these floats in
real-time.


## Step 0: Prerequisites

To follow through this tutorial completely, you will need:

1. Gramex community edition ([see installation instructions](/install))
2. An InfluxDB server
3. The InfluxDB Python client


We recommend running InfluxDB via Docker, as follows:

```bash
docker pull influxdb:latest
docker run -d -p 8086:8086 \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_MODE=setup \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_USERNAME=user \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_PASSWORD=password \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_ORG=org \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_BUCKET=sofar \
  -e DOCKER_INFLUXDB_INIT_ADMIN_TOKEN=mytoken123 \
  influxdb:latest
```

Install the InfluxDB Python client as follows:
```bash
pip install 'influxdb-client[ciso]'
```

## Step 1: Getting the data

Download the dataset [here](floats.json), and put it in an empty folder.

The dataset tracks the movement of SOFAR (SOund Fixing and Ranging)
floats. These are acoustically tracked submersible devices left in the ocean,
and their movements are tracked over a period of time to study oceanic currents.

The data looks like this:


<table class="table table-striped">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>lat</th>
      <th>long</th>
      <th>exp</th>
      <th>day</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>46.521</td>
      <td>-33.005</td>
      <td>CLIMODE</td>
      <td>22</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>49.419</td>
      <td>-39.945</td>
      <td>CLIMODE</td>
      <td>21</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>-58.568</td>
      <td>-91.521</td>
      <td>DIMES2</td>
      <td>31</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>47.157</td>
      <td>-33.939</td>
      <td>CLIMODE</td>
      <td>23</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>59.501</td>
      <td>-47.510</td>
      <td>ACALACE</td>
      <td>19</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

Each row represents the latitude and longitude of a float corresponding to an
experiment on a single day. Originally, the time period covered by this dataset
is nearly a decade, but since we need to finish running the visualization in a
much shorter time (say, 30 seconds), we have preprocessed the data such that it
appears as if the entire lifetime of the floats is a little over 30 seconds.

## Step 2: Setting Up FormHandler for InfluxDB

### Step 2.1: The Gramex App Specification
Once the InfluxDB is set up with an initial bucket, create a file named `gramex.yaml` in the same folder with the following contents:

```yaml
app:
  browser: true

schedule:
  push-data:
    function: main.push
    startup: true
    thread: true

url:
  influxdbhandler-data:
    pattern: /$YAMLURL/data
    handler: FormHandler
    kwargs:
      url: influxdb:http://localhost:8086/
      username: user
      token: mytoken123
      org: org
      bucket: sofar
      xsrf_cookies: false
      id: _time
```

### Step 2.2: Push Data to InfluxDB

Next, create a file named `main.py` in the folder, and add the following
content:

```python
import time
import pandas as pd
import requests


def push():
    df = pd.read_json("floats.json")
    while True:
        for day, group in df.groupby("day"):
            requests.post(
                "http://localhost:9988/data?measurement=latlong&tags=exp",
                data=group.to_dict(orient="list"),
            )
            time.sleep(1)
```

### Step 2.3: Add a Map

Next, create a file named `index.html` in the folder, with the following
content:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="https://unpkg.com/leaflet@1.7.1/dist/leaflet.css"
     integrity="sha512-xodZBNTC5n17Xt2atTPuE1HxjVMSvLVW9ocqUKLsCC5CXdbqCmblAshOMAS6/keqq/sMZMZ19scR4PsZChSR7A=="
     crossorigin=""/>
    <style>
      html,
      body {
          height: 100%;
          width: 100%;
      }
      body {
          margin: 0;
      }
      #map {
          width: 100%;
          height: 100%;
      }
    </style>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="map"></div>
  </body>
  <script src="https://d3js.org/d3.v3.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/leaflet@1.7.1/dist/leaflet.js"
   integrity="sha512-XQoYMqMTK8LvdxXYG3nZ448hOEQiglfqkJs1NOQV44cWnUrBc8PkAOcXy20w0vlaXaVUearIOBhiXZ5V3ynxwA=="
   crossorigin=""></script>
  <script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/jquery/3.6.0/jquery.min.js"></script>
  <script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/lodash@4.17.21/lodash.min.js"></script>
  <script>
    var map = L.map('map')
    L.tileLayer('https://{s}.tile.openstreetmap.org/{z}/{x}/{y}.png', {
      attribution: '&copy; <a href="https://openstreetmap.org/copyright">OpenStreetMap contributors</a>'
    }).addTo(map)
    map.fitBounds([
      [67, 147],
      [-63, -189]
    ])

    var data = null
    var polyLines = {}
    var colors = {}
    
    const updatePath = function(name, latlongs, colors) {
      let lat = _.filter(latlongs, {_field: 'lat'})[0]._value
      let lon = _.filter(latlongs, {_field: 'long'})[0]._value
      if (name in polyLines) {
        polyLines[name].addLatLng([lat, lon])
      } else {
        polyLines[name] = L.polyline([[lat, lon]], {color: colors[name]})
        polyLines[name].addTo(map)
      }
    }
    // More JS goes here.
  </script>
</html>
```

Note that we have:

* added some empty variables to accommodate data later, 
* added a function that renders the path of a float on the map, and
* left a placeholder comment to accommodate more Javascript code
as we develop the application through the following steps.

Run Gramex in this folder, and a browser window should open with a map:

![Map](world.png){.img-fluid}

If you visit the [`/data`](http://localhost:9988/data) endpoint in the browser,
you should see some data coming into InfluxDB as follows:


```json
[
  {
    "_start": 1632727879731,
    "_stop": 1635319879731,
    "_time": 1635319879185,
    "_value": 15.0,
    "_field": "day",
    "_measurement": "latlong",
    "exp": "ACALACE"
  }, {
    "_start": 1632727879731,
    "_stop": 1635319879731,
    "_time": 1635319873012,
    "_value": 9.0,
    "_field": "day",
    "_measurement": "latlong",
    "exp": "BOUNCE"
  }, // etc
]
```

As you refresh the page a few more times, you should see more and more records.


### Step 3: Plotting the Data on the Map

In step 2.2, we created a mechanism that pushes data to InfluxDB every second.
Therefore, we also need a corresponding javascript function that _pulls_ the data
from InfluxDB every second, and plots it on the map.

To do this, add the following code at the end of the `<script>` tag in
`index.html` (note that we had left a comment there earlier, to indicate the
position for the following code.

```javascript
    var colors = _.zipObject(
      ['TROATL', 'BOUNCE', 'ACALACE', 'CLIMODE', 'DIMES1', 'DIMES2'],
      ["red", "green", "blue", "yellow", "black", "magenta"]
    )
    var puller = setInterval(function() {
      // Get data accumulated in the last one second
      $.getJSON('data?_offset=-1s').done(function(d) {
          let latest = _.groupBy(_.filter(d, i => ['lat', 'long'].includes(i._field)), 'exp')
          for (const [expname, latlongs] of Object.entries(latest)) {
	    updatePath(expname, latlongs, colors)
          }
        })
    }, 1000)  // Run this every second

```

Refresh the page, and you should see a visualization that looks like this:

![Final](render.gif){.img-fluid}
